Username
student-04-ae27816da247@qwiklabs.net
Password
qwwMuTvlpy5u
Project ID
qwiklabs-gcp-01-8922789c6921
Student Resources

videocam
Connect & Extend GC

Cloud Functions: Qwik Start - Console
20 minutes
Free
GSP081
Google Cloud self-paced labs logo

Overview
A cloud function is a piece of code that runs in response to an event, such as an HTTP request, a message from a messaging service, or a file upload. Cloud events are things that happen in your cloud environment. These might be things like changes to data in a database, files added to a storage system, or a new virtual machine instance being created.

Since cloud functions are event-driven, they only run when something happens. This makes them a good choice for tasks that need to be done quickly or that don't need to be running all the time.

For example, you can use a cloud function to:

automatically generate thumbnails for images that are uploaded to Cloud Storage.
send a notification to a user's phone when a new message is received in Cloud Pub/Sub.
process data from a Cloud Firestore database and generate a report.
You can write your code in any language that supports Node.js, and you can deploy your code to the cloud with a few clicks. Once your cloud function is deployed, it will automatically start running in response to events.

This hands-on lab shows you how to create, deploy, and test a cloud function using the Google Cloud console.

What you'll do
Create a cloud function
Deploy and test the function
View logs
Setup and requirements
Before you click the Start Lab button
Read these instructions. Labs are timed and you cannot pause them. The timer, which starts when you click Start Lab, shows how long Google Cloud resources will be made available to you.

This hands-on lab lets you do the lab activities yourself in a real cloud environment, not in a simulation or demo environment. It does so by giving you new, temporary credentials that you use to sign in and access Google Cloud for the duration of the lab.

To complete this lab, you need:

Access to a standard internet browser (Chrome browser recommended).
Note: Use an Incognito or private browser window to run this lab. This prevents any conflicts between your personal account and the Student account, which may cause extra charges incurred to your personal account.
Time to complete the lab---remember, once you start, you cannot pause a lab.
Note: If you already have your own personal Google Cloud account or project, do not use it for this lab to avoid extra charges to your account.
How to start your lab and sign in to the Google Cloud console
Click the Start Lab button. If you need to pay for the lab, a pop-up opens for you to select your payment method. On the left is the Lab Details panel with the following:

The Open Google Cloud console button
Time remaining
The temporary credentials that you must use for this lab
Other information, if needed, to step through this lab
Click Open Google Cloud console (or right-click and select Open Link in Incognito Window if you are running the Chrome browser).

The lab spins up resources, and then opens another tab that shows the Sign in page.

Tip: Arrange the tabs in separate windows, side-by-side.

Note: If you see the Choose an account dialog, click Use Another Account.
If necessary, copy the Username below and paste it into the Sign in dialog.

student-04-ae27816da247@qwiklabs.net
Copied!
You can also find the Username in the Lab Details panel.

Click Next.

Copy the Password below and paste it into the Welcome dialog.

qwwMuTvlpy5u
Copied!
You can also find the Password in the Lab Details panel.

Click Next.

Important: You must use the credentials the lab provides you. Do not use your Google Cloud account credentials.
Note: Using your own Google Cloud account for this lab may incur extra charges.
Click through the subsequent pages:

Accept the terms and conditions.
Do not add recovery options or two-factor authentication (because this is a temporary account).
Do not sign up for free trials.
After a few moments, the Google Cloud console opens in this tab.

Note: To view a menu with a list of Google Cloud products and services, click the Navigation menu at the top-left. Navigation menu icon
Task 1. Create a function
In this step, you're going to create a cloud function using the console.

In the console, click the Navigation menu (Navigation Menu icon) > Cloud Functions.

Click Create function.

In the Create function dialog, enter the following values:

Field

Value

Environment

2nd Gen

Function name

GCFunction

Region

us-west1

Trigger type

HTTPS

Authentication

Allow unauthenticated invocations

Memory allocated (In Runtime, Build, Connections and Security Settings)

Keep it default

Autoscaling

Set the Maximum number of instance to 5 and then click Next

Note: A helpful popup may appear to validate the required APIs are enabled in the project. Click the ENABLE button when requested.
You deploy the function in the next section.

Task 2. Deploy the function
Still in the Create function dialog, in Source code for Inline editor use the default helloWorld function implementation already provided for index.js.

At the bottom, click Deploy to deploy the function.

After you click Deploy, the console redirects to the Cloud Functions Overview page.

Note:While the function is being deployed, the icon next to it is a small spinner. When it's deployed, the spinner is a green check mark.
Test completed task
Click Check my progress to verify your performed task. If you have completed the task successfully you will be granted an assessment score.

Deploy the function.
Task 3. Test the function
Test the deployed function.

In the Cloud Functions Overview page, click on GCFunction.

Cloud Functions Overview page

On function details dashboard, to test the function click on TESTING.

Cloud Functions details page

In the Triggering event field, enter the following text between the brackets {} and click Test the function.

"message":"Hello World!"
Copied!
In the Output field, you should see the message Success: Hello World!

In the Logs field, a status code of 200 indicates success. (It may take a minute for the logs to appear.)

A status code of 200 displays in the Logs field

Task 4. View logs
View logs from the Cloud Functions Overview page.

Click the blue arrow to go back to the Cloud Functions Overview page.

Blue arrow

Display the menu for your function, and click View logs.

View logs option in the function menu

Example of the log history that displays in Query results:

Log history on Query results page

Your application is deployed, tested, and you can view the logs.

Test the function
Task 5. Test your understanding
Below are multiple-choice questions to reinforce your understanding of this lab's concepts. Answer them to the best of your abilities.


Cloud Functions is a serverless execution environment for event driven services on Google Cloud.

True

False

Which type of trigger is used while creating Cloud Function in the lab?

Firebase

HTTP

Cloud Storage

Google Cloud Pub/Sub

Congratulations!
You used the Google Cloud console to create, deploy, and test a cloud function.

Finish Your quest
This self-paced lab is part of the Baseline: Deploy & Develop and Baseline: Infrastructure quests. A quest is a series of related labs that form a learning path. Completing a quest earns you a badge to recognize your achievement. You can make your badge or badges public and link to them in your online resume or social media account. Enroll in any quest that contains this lab and get immediate completion credit. See the Google Cloud Skills Boost catalog to see all available quests.

Take your next lab
This lab is also part of a series of labs called Qwik Starts. These labs are designed to give you a little taste of the many features available with Google Cloud. Search for "Qwik Starts" in the lab catalog to find the next lab you'd like to take!

Now that you used the console to start a Google Cloud Function, try and compare starting a Cloud Function using the command line. See Cloud Functions: Qwik Start - Using the Command Line.

Next steps / Learn more
For more information on creating triggers and associating them with your functions, see the Events and Triggers section of the Cloud Functions Guides.
Google Cloud training and certification
...helps you make the most of Google Cloud technologies. Our classes include technical skills and best practices to help you get up to speed quickly and continue your learning journey. We offer fundamental to advanced level training, with on-demand, live, and virtual options to suit your busy schedule. Certifications help you validate and prove your skill and expertise in Google Cloud technologies.

Manual Last Updated September 19, 2023

Lab Last Tested September 19, 2023

Copyright 2023 Google LLC All rights reserved. Google and the Google logo are trademarks of Google LLC. All other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated