user1
userbucket_1



Exploring IAM
1 hour
Free
Overview
In this lab, you learn how to use the Service Account User role and how to grant roles.

Objectives
In this lab, you learn how to perform the following tasks:

Use IAM to implement access control
Restrict access to specific features or resources
Use the Service Account User role
Lab setup
For each lab, you get a new Google Cloud project and set of resources for a fixed time at no cost.

Sign in to Qwiklabs using an incognito window.

Note the lab's access time (for example, 1:15:00), and make sure you can finish within that time.
There is no pause feature. You can restart if needed, but you have to start at the beginning.

When ready, click Start lab.

Note your lab credentials (Username and Password). You will use them to sign in to the Google Cloud Console.

Click Open Google Console.

Click Use another account and copy/paste credentials for this lab into the prompts.
If you use other credentials, you'll receive errors or incur charges.

Accept the terms and skip the recovery resource page.

Note: Do not click End Lab unless you have finished the lab or want to restart it. This clears your work and removes the project.

Task 1. Setup for two users
Sign in to the Cloud Console as the first user
This lab provisions you with two user names available in the Connection Details dialog. Sign in to the Cloud Console in an Incognito window as usual with the Username 1 provided in Qwiklabs. Note that both user names use the same single password.
Sign in to the Cloud Console as the second user
Open another tab in your incognito window.
Browse to console.cloud.google.com.
Click on the user icon in the top-right corner of the screen, and then click Add account.
Sign in to the Cloud Console with the Username 2 provided in Qwiklabs.
Note: At some points in this lab, if you sign out of the Username 1 account, the Username 2 account is deleted by Qwiklabs. So remain signed in to Username 1 until you are done using Username 2.
Task 2. Explore the IAM console
Make sure you are on the Username 1 Cloud Console tab.

Navigate to the IAM console and explore roles
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & admin > IAM.
Click Grant Access and explore the roles in the drop-down menu. Note the various roles associated with each resource by navigating the Roles menu.
Click CANCEL.
Switch to the Username 2 Cloud Console tab.
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & admin > IAM. Browse the list for the lines with the names associated with Username 1 and Username 2 in the Qwiklabs Connection Details dialog.
Note: Username 2 currently has access to the project, but does not have the Project Owner role, so it cannot edit any of the roles. Hover over the pencil icon for Username 2 to verify this.
Switch back to the Username 1 Cloud Console tab.
In the IAM console, for Username 2, click on the pencil icon. Username 2 currently has the Viewer role. Do not change the Project Role.
Click CANCEL.
Task 3. Prepare a resource for access testing
Create a bucket and upload a sample file
Switch to the Username 1 Cloud Console tab if you aren't already there.

On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click Cloud Storage > Buckets.

Click +Create.

Specify the following, and leave the remaining settings as their defaults:

Property	Value (type value or select option as specified)
Name	Enter a globally unique name
Location type	Multi-region
Note: Record the bucket name: it will be used in a later step and referred to as [YOUR_BUCKET_NAME]
Click CREATE.
Note: If you see the prompt, Public access will be prevented and the option Enforce public access prevention on this bucket is checked, then click Confirm.
Click UPLOAD FILES.
Upload any sample file from your local machine.
When the file has been uploaded, click on the three dots at the end of the line containing the file, and click Rename.
Rename the file to sample.txt, and click RENAME.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create a bucket and upload a sample file

Verify project viewer access
Switch to the Username 2 Cloud Console tab.

In the Console, navigate to Navigation menu > Cloud Storage > Buckets.

Verify that Username 2 can see the bucket.

Task 4. Remove project access
Remove Project Viewer role for Username 2
Switch to the Username 1 Cloud Console tab.
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & admin > IAM.
Select Username 2 and click Remove Access.
Note: Verify that you're removing access for Username 2. If you accidentally remove access for Username 1 you will have to restart this lab!
Confirm by clicking CONFIRM.
Notice that the user has disappeared from the list! The user has no access now.

Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Remove project access

Verify that Username 2 has lost access
Switch to the Username 2 Cloud Console tab.

On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click Cloud overview > Dashboard.

On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click Cloud Storage > Buckets. An error will be displayed. If not, refresh the page. Username 2 still has a Google Cloud account, but has no access to the project.

Task 5. Add storage access
Add storage permissions
Copy the value of Username 2 from the Qwiklabs Connection Details dialog.
Switch to the Username 1 Cloud Console tab.
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & admin > IAM.
Click Grant Access to add the user.
For New principals, paste the Username 2 value you copied from the Qwiklabs Connection Details dialog.
For Select a role, select Cloud Storage > Storage Object Viewer.
Click SAVE.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Add storage permissions

Verify that Username 2 has storage access
Switch to the Username 2 Cloud Console tab.
Note: Username 2 doesn't have Project Viewer roles, so that user can't see the project or any of its resources in the Console. However, the user has specific access to Cloud Storage.
To start Cloud Shell, click Activate Cloud Shell (Activate Cloud Shell icon). If prompted, click Continue.
To view the contents of the bucket you created earlier, run the following command, replacing [YOUR_BUCKET_NAME] with the unique name of the Cloud Storage bucket you created:
gcloud storage ls gs://[YOUR_BUCKET_NAME]
Copied!
As you can see, Username 2 has limited access to Cloud Storage.

Close the Username 2 Cloud Console tab. The rest of the lab is performed on the Username 1 Cloud Console tab.
Switch to the Username 1 Cloud Console tab.
Task 6. Set up the Service Account User
In this part of the lab, you assign narrow permissions to service accounts and learn how to use the Service Account User role.

Create a service account
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & Admin > Service Accounts.
Click + CREATE SERVICE ACCOUNT.
Specify the Service account name as read-bucket-objects .
Click CREATE AND CONTINUE.
For Select a role, select Cloud Storage > Storage Object Viewer .
Click CONTINUE.
Click DONE.
Add the user to the service account
Select the read-bucket-objects service account.
Click on the three dots to the right of the service account name. Then click on Manage permissions
Note: You will grant the user the role of Service Account User, which allows that person to use a service account on a VM, if they have access to the VM. You could perform this activity for a specific user, group, or domain. For training purposes, you will grant the Service Account User role to everyone at a company called Altostrat.com. Altostrat.com is a fake company used for demonstration and training.
Click on the GRANT ACCESS button. Specify the following, and leave the remaining settings as their defaults:
Property	Value (type value or select option as specified)
New principals	altostrat.com
Role	Service Accounts > Service Account User
Click SAVE.
Grant Compute Engine access
You now give the entire organization at Altostrat the Compute Engine Admin role.

On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & admin > IAM.
Click Grant Access.
Specify the following, and leave the remaining settings as their defaults:
Property	Value (type value or select option as specified)
New principals	altostrat.com
Select a role	Compute Engine > Compute Instance Admin (v1)
Click SAVE.
Note: This step is a rehearsal of the activity you would perform for a specific user. This action gives the user limited abilities with a VM instance. The user will be able to connect via SSH to a VM and perform some administration tasks.
Create a VM with the Service Account User
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click Compute Engine > VM instances.
Click CREATE INSTANCE.
Specify the following, and leave the remaining settings as their defaults:
Property	Value (type value or select option as specified)
Name	demoiam
Region	Lab Region
Zone	Lab Zone
Series	E2
Machine Type	e2-micro (2 vCPU, 1 GB memory)
Boot disk	Debian GNU/Linux 11 (bullseye)
Service account	read-bucket-objects
Click Create.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Set up the Service Account User and create a VM

Task 7. Explore the Service Account User role
At this point, you might have the user test access by connecting via SSH to the VM and performing the next actions. As the owner of the project, you already possess the Service Account User role. So you can simulate what the user would experience by just using SSH to access the VM from the Cloud Console.

The actions you perform and results will be the same as if you were the target user.

Use the Service Account User
For demoiam, click SSH to launch a terminal and connect.
Run the following command:
gcloud compute instances list
Copied!
Result (example output):

ERROR: (gcloud.compute.instances.list) Some requests did not succeed:
 - Required 'compute.zones.list' permission for 'projects/qwiklabs-gcp'
What happened? Why?

Copy the sample.txt file from the bucket you created earlier. Note that the trailing period is part of the command below. It means copy to "this location":
gcloud storage cp gs://[YOUR_BUCKET_NAME]/sample.txt .
Copied!
Result (example output):

Copying gs://train-test-iam/sample.txt...
/ [1 files][   28.0 B/   28.0 B]
Operation completed over 1 objects/28.0 B.
To rename the file you copied, run the following command:
mv sample.txt sample2.txt
Copied!
To copy the renamed file back to the bucket, run the following command:
gcloud storage cp sample2.txt gs://[YOUR_BUCKET_NAME]
Copied!
Result (example output):

AccessDeniedException: 403 Caller does not have storage.objects.create access to bucket train-test-iam.
Note: What happened? Because you connected via SSH to the instance, you can act as the service account essentially assuming the same permissions. The service account the instance was started with had the Storage Viewer role, which permits downloading objects from GCS buckets in the project. To list instances in a project, you need to grant the compute.instance.list permission. Because the service account did not have this permission, you could not list instances running in the project. Because the service account did have permission to download objects, it could download an object from the bucket. It did not have permission to write objects, so you got an 403 access denied message.
On the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click IAM & admin > IAM.
Browse the list for the lines with read-bucket-objects, click on the pencil icon. read-bucket-objects currently has the Storage Object Viewer role. Alter the Role to Cloud Storage > Storage Object Creator .
Click Save
Return to the SSH window for demoiam
To copy the renamed file back to the bucket, run the following command:
gcloud storage cp sample2.txt gs://[YOUR_BUCKET_NAME]
Copied!
This time the command succeeds as the service account has the correct permissions.

Task 8. Review
In this lab you exercised granting and revoking IAM roles, first to a user, Username 2, and then to a Service Account User. You could allocate Service Account User credentials and "bake" them into a VM to create specific-purpose authorized bastion hosts.

End your lab
When you have completed your lab, click End Lab. Google Cloud Skills Boost removes the resources you’ve used and cleans the account for you.

You will be given an opportunity to rate the lab experience. Select the applicable number of stars, type a comment, and then click Submit.

The number of stars indicates the following:

1 star = Very dissatisfied
2 stars = Dissatisfied
3 stars = Neutral
4 stars = Satisfied
5 stars = Very satisfied
You can close the dialog box if you don't want to provide feedback.

For feedback, suggestions, or corrections, please use the Support tab.

Copyright 2022 Google LLC All rights reserved. Google and the Google logo are trademarks of Google LLC. All other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.