Resource Monitoring
1 hour
Free
Overview
In this lab, you learn how to use Cloud Monitoring to gain insight into applications that run on Google Cloud.

Objectives
In this lab, you learn how to perform the following tasks:

Explore Cloud Monitoring
Add charts to dashboards
Create alerts with multiple conditions
Create resource groups
Create uptime checks
Setup
For each lab, you get a new Google Cloud project and set of resources for a fixed time at no cost.

Sign in to Qwiklabs using an incognito window.

Note the lab's access time (for example, 1:15:00), and make sure you can finish within that time.
There is no pause feature. You can restart if needed, but you have to start at the beginning.

When ready, click Start lab.

Note your lab credentials (Username and Password). You will use them to sign in to the Google Cloud Console.

Click Open Google Console.

Click Use another account and copy/paste credentials for this lab into the prompts.
If you use other credentials, you'll receive errors or incur charges.

Accept the terms and skip the recovery resource page.

Note: Do not click End Lab unless you have finished the lab or want to restart it. This clears your work and removes the project.

Task 1. Create a Cloud Monitoring workspace
Verify resources to monitor
Three VM instances have been created for you that you will monitor.

In the Cloud Console, on the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click Compute Engine > VM instances. Notice the nginxstack-1, nginxstack-2 and nginxstack-3 instances.
Create a Monitoring workspace
You will now setup a Monitoring workspace that's tied to your Google Cloud Project. The following steps create a new account that has a free trial of Monitoring.

In the Cloud Console, click on Navigation menu > Monitoring.

Wait for your workspace to be provisioned.

When the Monitoring dashboard opens, your workspace is ready.

The Monitoring dashboard open on the Overview page


Why is monitoring important to Google?

Google uses monitoring to ensure they have all the important metrics for reporting purposes to customers and the other interested bodies. The number of reports requires the collection and reporting to be both broad and deep.

It is at the base of site reliability which incorporates aspects of software engineering and applies that to operations whose goals are to create ultra-scalable and highly reliable software systems.

Monitoring is important to ensure that Google complies with regulatory requirements defined by both government and industry security bodies.

Task 2. Custom dashboards
Create a dashboard
In the left pane, click Dashboards.
Click +Create Dashboard.
For New Dashboard Name, type My Dashboard.
Add a chart
Click Add Widget,and then select Line.

For Widget Title, give your chart a name (you can revise this before you save based on the selections you make).

Type CPU utilization or CPU usage in Metric field, Click VM Instance > Instance. Select CPU utilization or CPU usage and click Apply.

Note: Disable Show only active resources & metrics if we are not able to find the CPU utilization
Click + Add Filter and explore the various options.

Metrics Explorer
The Metrics Explorer allows you to examine resources and metrics without having to create a chart on a dashboard. Try to recreate the chart you just created using the Metrics Explorer.

In the left pane, click Metrics explorer.
For Resource & Metric, Select a Metric.
Explore the various options and try to recreate the chart you created earlier.
Note: Not all metrics are currently available on the Metrics Explorer, so you might not be able to find the exact metric you used on the previous step.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create custom dashboard

Task 3. Alerting policies

What is not a recommended best practice for alerts?

Configure alerting on symptoms and not necessarily causes.

Report all noise to ensure all data points are presented.

Use multiple notification channels so you avoid a single point of failure.

Customize your alerts to the audience need.

Create an alert and add the first condition
In the Cloud Console, from the Navigation menu, select Monitoring > Alerting.
Click + Create Policy.
Click on Select a metric dropdown. Disable the Show only active resources & metrics.
Type VM Instance in filter by resource and metric name and click on VM Instance > Instance. Select CPU usage or CPU Utilization and click Apply.
Note: If you cannot locate the VM Instance resource type, you might have to refresh the page.
Set Rolling windows to 1 min.
Click Next. Set Threshold position to Above Threshold and set 20 as your Threshold value.
Add a second condition
Click +ADD ALERT CONDITION.
Repeat the steps above to specify the second condition for this policy. For example, repeat the condition for a different instance. Click Next.
In Multi-condition trigger, for Trigger when, click All conditions are met.
Click Next.
Configure notifications and finish the alerting policy
Click on the dropdown arrow next to Notification Channels, then click on Manage Notification Channels.
A Notification channels page will open in a new tab.

Scroll down the page and click on ADD NEW for Email.
Enter your personal email in the Email Address field and a Display name.
Click Save.
Go back to the previous Configure notifications and finalize alert tab.
Click on Notification Channels again, then click on the Refresh icon to get the display name you mentioned in the previous step. Click Notification Channels again if needed.
Now, select your Display name and click OK.
Enter a name of your choice in the Alert policy name field.
Click Next.
Review the alert and click Create Policy.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create alerting policies

Task 4. Resource groups
In the left pane, click Groups.
Click + Create Group.
Enter a name for the group. For example: VM instances
In the Criteria section, type nginx in the value field below Contains.
Click DONE.
Click CREATE.
Review the dashboard Cloud Monitoring created for your group.
Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create resource groups

Task 5. Uptime monitoring

Select all valid targets for Cloud Monitoring uptime alert notifications.

email

Pub/sub

SMS

webhook

3rd party service

EC2 service

In the Monitoring tab, click on Uptime Checks.
Click + Create Uptime Check.
Specify the following, and leave the remaining settings as their defaults:
Property	Value (type value or select option as specified)
Protocol	HTTP
Resource Type	Instance
Applies To	Group
Group	Select your group
Check Frequency	1 minute
Click on Continue to leave the other details to default. In Alert & Notification tab, select your Notification Channels from the dropdown.

Click Continue.

For Title, enter a name of your choice for the uptime check.

Click Test to verify that your uptime check can connect to the resource.

When you see a green check mark everything can connect. Click Create.

The uptime check you configured takes a while for it to become active.

Click Check my progress to verify the objective.
Create uptime check

Task 6. Disable the alert
Disable the alert Alerting policies stay active for a while after a project is deleted, just in case it needs to be reinstalled. Since this is a lab, and you will not have access to this project again, remove the alerting policy you created.

Navigate to the Alerting section.

From your Alert's Policy details page, click the Enabled link at the top of the page.

You will be asked to confirm that you want to disable the alerting policy - click Disable.

The link will now say Disabled.

Task 7. Review
In this lab, you learned how to:

Monitor your projects
Create a Cloud Monitoring workspace
Create alerts with multiple conditions
Add charts to dashboards
Create resource groups
Create uptime checks for your services
End your lab
When you have completed your lab, click End Lab. Google Cloud Skills Boost removes the resources you’ve used and cleans the account for you.

You will be given an opportunity to rate the lab experience. Select the applicable number of stars, type a comment, and then click Submit.

The number of stars indicates the following:

1 star = Very dissatisfied
2 stars = Dissatisfied
3 stars = Neutral
4 stars = Satisfied
5 stars = Very satisfied
You can close the dialog box if you don't want to provide feedback.

For feedback, suggestions, or corrections, please use the Support tab.

Copyright 2022 Google LLC All rights reserved. Google and the Google logo are trademarks of Google LLC. All other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.