Getting Started with VPC Networking and Google Compute Engine
40 minutes
Free
Overview
Google Cloud Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) provides networking functionality to Compute Engine virtual machine (VM) instances, Kubernetes Engine containers, and App Engine flexible environment. In other words, without a VPC network you cannot create VM instances, containers, or App Engine applications. Therefore, each Google Cloud project has a default network to get you started.

You can think of a VPC network as similar to a physical network, except that it is virtualized within Google Cloud. A VPC network is a global resource that consists of a list of regional virtual subnetworks (subnets) in data centers, all connected by a global wide area network (WAN). VPC networks are logically isolated from each other in Google Cloud.

In this lab, you create an auto mode VPC network with firewall rules and two VM instances. Then, you explore the connectivity for the VM instances.

Objectives
In this lab, you learn how to perform the following tasks:

Explore the default VPC network
Create an auto mode network with firewall rules
Create VM instances using Compute Engine
Explore the connectivity for VM instances
Setup and requirements
For each lab, you get a new Google Cloud project and set of resources for a fixed time at no cost.

Sign in to Qwiklabs using an incognito window.

Note the lab's access time (for example, 1:15:00), and make sure you can finish within that time.
There is no pause feature. You can restart if needed, but you have to start at the beginning.

When ready, click Start lab.

Note your lab credentials (Username and Password). You will use them to sign in to the Google Cloud Console.

Click Open Google Console.

Click Use another account and copy/paste credentials for this lab into the prompts.
If you use other credentials, you'll receive errors or incur charges.

Accept the terms and skip the recovery resource page.

Note: Do not click End Lab unless you have finished the lab or want to restart it. This clears your work and removes the project.

Task 1. Explore the default network
Each Google Cloud project has a default network with subnets, routes, and firewall rules.

View the subnets
The default network has a subnet in each Google Cloud region.

In the Cloud Console, on the Navigation menu (Navigation menu icon), click VPC network > VPC networks.

Click default.

Notice the default network with its subnets.
Each subnet is associated with a Google Cloud region and a private RFC 1918 CIDR block for its internal IP addresses range and a gateway.

View the routes
Routes tell VM instances and the VPC network how to send traffic from an instance to a destination, either inside the network or outside Google Cloud. Each VPC network comes with some default routes to route traffic among its subnets and send traffic from eligible instances to the internet.

In the left pane, click Routes.

In Effective Routes tab select default for network and select any region.

Click VIEW.